switching this lesson to the new Carpentries Workbench Template (#23)
hpc-carpentry/hpc-chapel: episodes/05-loops.md

---
title: "Getting started with loops"
teaching: 60
exercises: 30
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

> - "How do I get run the same piece of code repeatedly?"

Reviewer: Check grammar.

Author: Resolved through a commit.

and here we go...
Temperature at iteration 0: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 20: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 40: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 60: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 80: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 100: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 120: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 140: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 160: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 180: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 200: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 220: 24.9999
Temperature at iteration 240: 24.9996
Temperature at iteration 260: 24.9991
Temperature at iteration 280: 24.9981
Temperature at iteration 300: 24.9963
Temperature at iteration 320: 24.9935
Temperature at iteration 340: 24.9893
Temperature at iteration 360: 24.9833
Temperature at iteration 380: 24.9752
Temperature at iteration 400: 24.9644
Temperature at iteration 420: 24.9507
Temperature at iteration 440: 24.9337
Temperature at iteration 460: 24.913
Temperature at iteration 480: 24.8883
Temperature at iteration 500: 24.8595
```

As we can see, the temperature in the middle of the plate (position 50,50) is slowly decreasing as the plate
is cooling down.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Challenge 1: Can you do it?

> What would be the temperature at the top right corner of the plate? The border of the plate is in contact with

Reviewer: > The border of the plate is in contact with the boundary conditions

This statement convolves the physical system (border of the plate) with a mathematical concept (boundary condition). Please rephrase for clarity.

Author: I rewrote the paragraph about points close to the boundary, and updated 03-ranges-arrays.md with a description of the internal grid and the surrounding layer of points. Resolved through a commit.

the boundary conditions, which are set to zero, so we expect the temperature at these points to decrease
faster. Modify the code to see the temperature at the top right corner.

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

To see the evolution of the temperature at the top right corner of the plate, we just need to modify `x` and

> `y`. This corner correspond to the first row (`x=1`) and the last column (`y=cols`) of the plate.

Reviewer: I believe the values are transposed: the first row has $y=1$, and the last column has $x=N$.

Author: No, the code prints `temp[x, y]`, and the first index in `temp` runs over rows, the second over columns, so x=1, y=cols is the correct solution.

Temperature at iteration 500: 0.0634717
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Challenge 2: Can you do it?

Now let's have some more interesting boundary conditions. Suppose that the plate is heated by a source of 80
degrees located at the bottom right corner, and that the temperature on the rest of the border decreases
linearly as one gets farther form the corner (see the image below). Utilise for loops to setup the described
boundary conditions. Compile and run your code to see how the temperature is changing now.

:::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

To get the linear distribution, the 80 degrees must be divided by the number of rows or columns in our
plate. So, the following couple of for loops will give us what we want:

```chpl
// this setup the boundary conditions
for i in 1..rows do
{
  past_temp[i,cols+1]=i*80.0/rows;
  temp[i,cols+1]=i*80.0/rows;
}
for j in 1..cols do
{
  past_temp[rows+1,j]=j*80.0/cols;
  temp[rows+1,j]=j*80.0/cols;
}
```

Note that the boundary conditions must be set in both arrays, `past_temp` and `temp`, otherwise, they will be

> set to zero again after the first iteration. Also note that 80 degrees are written as a real numbe r 80.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
set to zero again after the first iteration. Also note that 80 degrees are written as a real number 80.0.
```

Author: Resolved through a rewrite / commit.

The division of integers in Chapel returns an integer, then, as `rows` and `cols` are integers, we must have
80 as real so that the quotient is not truncated.

```bash
>> chpl base_solution.chpl -o base_solution
>> ./base_solution
```

```output
The simulation will consider a matrix of 100 by 100 elements, it will run
up to 500 iterations, or until the largest difference in temperature
between iterations is less than 0.0001. You are interested in the evolution
of the temperature at the position (1,100) of the matrix...

and here we go...
Temperature at iteration 0: 25.0
Temperature at iteration 20: 2.0859
Temperature at iteration 40: 1.42663
...
Temperature at iteration 460: 0.826941
Temperature at iteration 480: 0.824959
Temperature at iteration 500: 0.823152
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Challenge 3: Can you do it?

> So far, `curdif` has been always equal to `mindif`, which means that our main while loop will always run the

Reviewer: > which means that our main while loop will always run the 500 iterations

The proposed solution does not change this behavior, so the point is lost. Consider setting `mindif` to a greater value, or refactor the challenge problem.

Author: I increased `niter` to 10_000 and updated this section correspondingly so that we reach convergence after 7505 iterations.

Temperature at iteration 20: 2.0859
Temperature at iteration 40: 1.42663
Temperature at iteration 60: 1.20229
Temperature at iteration 80: 1.09044
Temperature at iteration 100: 1.02391
Temperature at iteration 120: 0.980011
Temperature at iteration 140: 0.949004
Temperature at iteration 160: 0.926011
Temperature at iteration 180: 0.908328
Temperature at iteration 200: 0.894339
Temperature at iteration 220: 0.88302
Temperature at iteration 240: 0.873688
Temperature at iteration 260: 0.865876
Temperature at iteration 280: 0.85925
Temperature at iteration 300: 0.853567
Temperature at iteration 320: 0.848644
Temperature at iteration 340: 0.844343
Temperature at iteration 360: 0.840559
Temperature at iteration 380: 0.837205
Temperature at iteration 400: 0.834216
Temperature at iteration 420: 0.831537
Temperature at iteration 440: 0.829124
Temperature at iteration 460: 0.826941
Temperature at iteration 480: 0.824959
Temperature at iteration 500: 0.823152

Final temperature at the desired position after 500 iterations is: 0.823152
The greatest difference in temperatures between the last two iterations was: 0.0258874
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

> - "Use `for` statement to organise a loop."

Reviewer: There's a lot more to loops than "use `for`"! Consider discussing the looping conditions, 0- vs. 1- vs. arbitrary-indexing, and the fact that a `for` loop will always run over every element of the iterand. If there is a simulation completion condition, a `while` loop may be more appropriate.

Author: I rewrote the key point to include both `for` and `while` loops, and explain their difference.
